                  * Proposal *
 New Interpretation of the MinSpeed field in Queries

**************************************************
Min Speed - 2 bytes - bits are numbered 15 - 0 as such:
15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0

A Gnutella Query message has two bytes devoted to the Minimum Speed.  
Legacy use of these two bytes was hardly ever respected, so we now use 
these two bytes to support recent advancements in Gnutella.  The two 
bytes are read from left to right, as are the bits.  Note that the
field is written in big-endian format - as most computing platforms
are little-endian, be sure to carefully write out this field.

GUIDELINES FOR QUERIERS
-----------------------

1. To specify interpretation of the Min Speed bytes as specified
below, set bit 15.

2. To indicate that the query source is a firewalled servent, set bit
14.

3. To indicate the desire to receive LimeWire-style XML metadata in
your replies, please set bit 13 (if you don't care about it, lets save
everyone trouble - we won't send it).

The interpretation of the other bits is not yet specified and bits reserved
for future use (any other useful suggestions for their use are
welcomed).  The latest use of the bits can be viewed at:
http://groups.yahoo.com/group/the_gdf/database?method=reportRows&tbl=14

GUIDELINES FOR SERVENTS RESPONDING TO QUERIES
---------------------------------------------

If a query has bit 15 of its Min Speed bytes set, please regard the
following guidelines:

1. If the firewall bit (bit 14) of a query is set and you are also
firewalled, please refrain from returning any results.

2. If the xml bit (bit 13) of a query is cleared AND you support
LimeWire-style XML metadata, please do not send any metadata with your
responses.

Again, please note the latest use of the bits at:
http://groups.yahoo.com/group/the_gdf/database?method=reportRows&tbl=14

-----------------------
**************************************************


